this is august 19 2021 and i'm making
this video unexpectedly from a
perspective because quite a few people
wrote in to me expressing frankly that
they felt some kind of way emotionally
about it that they were reflecting on it
intellectually that one way or another
they were thinking about what the war in
afghanistan meant looking back at the
last 20 years and now looking ahead at
the next 20 years also
and i do kind of feel like it's my job
even if it's only to share in your
suffering to come on and offer somewhat
more profound and useful reflections
than what you can get from jimmy dore
i have some degree of sympathy for
people like jimmy dore
but it's inevitable that i also feel
some very real contempt for them and
it's almost needless to say at a time
like this you're gonna get absolutely
nothing meaningful out of cnn
fox news
what you can get out of the mainstream
media um
in some ways they're kind of choking on
their own past propaganda and wondering
what what's the new propaganda message
now how is it that they can present you
know
defeat as as victory and so on there's a
mixture of very powerful confusing
self-contradictory messages being put
out when you think about it must be
really hard to be a kid right now what
if you're eight years old or 12 years
old trying to understand this and if
you're eight years old or 12 years old
this war has been happening your whole
life that's what happens before you were
born that's right by the way i don't
mean an eight or twelve-year-old in
afghanistan that's an interesting
question too how do you see this if
you're 12 years old in afghanistan how
do you see if you're eight years old or
12 years old in syria you know there
were places around the world but even if
you're just a kid growing up in you know
the swamp in florida in the united
states of america you know if you're a
child right now it's probably much much
more confusing than it would be for
someone uh my own age so on and so forth
so you know
i'm happy to have the questions for the
audience i'm happy once in a while they
distract me so
william mcgee and you were asking me if
i saw the film footage of the tower the
taliban celebrating their victory riding
around on bumper cars
if you watched my youtube channel not
only have i seen that footage i've
edited and presented it on my youtube
channel come on
how can you ask me if i've seen it it's
on it's on about right now i'm sorry
i don't mind this is part of the joy of
live streaming i suppose doing a
pre-recorded videos i get to respond to
this
of course i've seen it
but yeah that's a particularly surreal
moment of the taliban you know uh
what what do you want them to do they
don't drink alcohol they don't sleep
with prostitutes they don't do the
things other armies do when they
celebrate a victory some of them go to
amusement parks and they uh they ride on
the bumper cars apparently apparently
that's not the taliban celebrate their
victory what are they going to do say
more prayers say more prayers than usual
it's
anyway it's nice we're opening the video
uh you know with this kind of affable
relaxed way obviously it's a
tremendously serious center so let me
ask you two hypothetical questions just
to situate this topic in all its due
seriousness and as i said at the
beginning i'm making this video now
because quite a few people wrote to me
asking me to make a video of this kind
and
for me at age 42 i know where they're
coming from this was 20 years of my life
it's 20 years of your life anyone is
over 20. it's been 20 years of your life
that have gone into this war in
afghanistan even it's just been sitting
back engaging in analysis and commentary
on it it's been a huge part of all our
lives so the first question i want you
to ask yourself is
what if this is
the most significant political event of
your
lifetime i think anyone here would say
what a tremendously depressing thought
what if the way the united states of
america bungled the war in afghanistan
is the single most important thing in my
century in the century in which i happen
to be alive i think anyone who stops and
reflects on it would now feel like whoa
if that's true i should have paid much
more attention to it i should have been
much more involved i should have taken
much more responsibility because this
really matters and of course it matters
of course it does
i feel bad for kids if you're 12 years
old or 15 years old you might not
remember but you know there was a time
when extraordinary rendition
changed the way america was seen
all around the world when the use of
torture changed the way america was seen
all around the world and you know
in florida in the okapinoki swamp in
florida you may have forgotten that let
me tell you something in afghanistan
they haven't forgotten
in iraq they haven't forgotten in iran
they haven't forgotten in syria like all
around the world everyone else remembers
the extent to which america morally
discredited itself in this war even
though there was tremendous sympathy
support in the united states of america
say from 2001 to 2003 the very beginning
phase right after the september 11th
text there was there was an almost
unanimous feeling in the western world
within america and western europe and so
on that america was in a morally
righteous position to wage war in
afghanistan because of the terrorist
attack on
the twin towers in new york city and
still love anyway
i think i have to start by asking
what if this is it
what if for our generation this was our
world war ii
right what if this was the important war
that your grandchildren are going to ask
you
well what did you do during the war
grand dad what did you
you know what if this was the momentous
definitive occasion for our generation
to change the history of the world and
one we bungled it and two no offense but
you didn't pay very much attention
now
what does that mean let's let's flesh
that out what is what is not paying
very much attention mean
can any of you name a war hero from the
the afghan war it's 20 year war it's
where you are can you name a general or
a commander
you know on the american side presumably
you know the italians were there the
british were there all these armies
there can you name
a general or a commander who did
something heroic
can you describe to me one battle from
this war
no i i can describe to you battles from
the war between napoleon and the emperor
of russia between napoleon and the
russian czar right i can there are all
kinds of chapters of history i can
describe riveting battles i can tell you
about heroic people you know
sorry
from you search your memory some of you
will know about particular battles in
the american civil war from the american
revolutionary war particular heroes
particular events right i have a lot of
them fresh in my mind because of reading
can you can you describe to me a single
battle came a single commander a single
leader who did anything heroic in the
war can you know
can you break down for me the political
decisions or the strategic decisions
that were made by any of the presidents
united states whether it's george w bush
obama or obviously relatively briefly
donald trump that that mattered that
decided that determined the outcome or
the fate of this war and there probably
are other wars you could say that about
depending on who you are you might be
able to say this about world war one or
world war ii or there's some other one
the napoleonic wars there's some other
war that you've taken this level of of
interest in your life well you lived
through it homie you had 20 years how
many when you look at the map of
afghanistan how many of the places can
you even pronounce you know we don't
pronounce abu ghraib right sorry so it's
not of course it's part of the same
conflict though the abu ghraib person
we all learned about the names of
prisons in cuba camp x-ray in cuba and
so on we learned about these terrible
things connected to the uh you know the
american military effort but you know
sure there is a sense in which none of
us paid enough attention none of us were
involved and why this comes back to the
title of this video
because we know
we couldn't make a difference we know we
live in a society that is very
fundamentally not democratic
that what what we know and what we feel
in our house we have no opportunity
whatsoever to make a difference so i i
said i was just going with two questions
but i might as well kind of close off
this this topic as we'll say a few more
a few more words about this every so
often people people
uh
okay sorry frieda i've got to tell you
you know
you did wrong so frieda says it's mostly
bombing so nothing really i totally
disagree so i i don't know if you guys
have i've watched documentary films you
know that are really showing
combat
on the ground face-to-face man-to-man
combat and it's tremendously dramatic i
remember seeing um documentary footage
of a guy
this particular example was on youtube
and he was coming around the corner at
the taliban and a sniper hit him
and penetrated his water flask so i
think you can imagine water flies down
to the often i think the two layers of
aluminum could be steel i think it's
aluminum and the bullet penetrated the
metal but didn't penetrate his flesh so
there's a sniper from the afghan side in
combat so you saw this either the film
footage this is real life footage is not
a it's not a movie so you just kind of
see the scuffle
and then afterwards see the guy saying
look
like that's how close that was you know
he could he could have died at that
moment um
no no no no there are there are
tremendously dramatic
uh face-to-face knife to knife gun to
gun
combat stories every day of that of that
war
and again quite a lot of it was uploaded
to obscure places on youtube some of it
was added together and put into
documentary films
um
[Music]
i'm sorry
i could i could sit here for a minute
and remember the names of the films i've
seen the reason i can't remember is that
they're spread it over 20 years i'm
sorry you know uh no no no so you know
it was a real
war
[Music]
i know it sounds ridiculous but i mean i
remember one comment i actually do
remember who said this remember one
political analyst who was shocked by
seeing some of the footage from
afghanistan and that this political
analyst said look when i'm looking at
this footage
it seems like nothing has changed since
world war ii because it was it's men on
foot with rifles you know like it was
that kind of footage and the the guy who
was answering was was a bit more of a
military expert i wouldn't really it was
some with some military experience and
you said of course
it's combat
like what what do you think's changed
you know yeah i kind of i kind of relate
to both sides of that you know what i
mean like i understand like on the one
hand people think well we're living in
the 21st century now we have computers
and cell phones so combat is different
and the other guy who's been there he
has some real world's most like no it's
men in boots with rifles running around
in alleyways shooting each other you
know what i mean and the bullets go in a
straight line and you know it's it
hasn't changed that much the guns have
become a little bit more accurate you
know the guns fire a little bit faster
you know what i mean there are some
little changes like that but no i mean
there's there's this sense in which you
know
damn things change so no you know
another thing that's funny coming out of
this particular observation is that of
course there are a lot of complaints in
the left wing that we've all been
bathing in propaganda no no we haven't
been
we've all been living in a state of
total indifference and ignorance to the
war in afghanistan because again if if
there were effective propaganda you
would know you would have been hearing
every week the names of the heroes and
the names of the fallen and the names of
the battles and what was happening from
town to town and from army based army
base so the the estimate i managed to
find was that the united states built
bases
in afghanistan uh 550 at tremendous cost
and now all 550 of those bases have
either been destroyed by the americans
themselves we don't know
many of them were or they've been taken
over by the afghanistan so those were
you know reinforced
concrete
bulletproof bomb proof bases meant to
last forever
and
it didn't last
um
all right so i was opening with with two
questions
first question what if this turns out to
be the most important political event of
your lives and i'm saying this to you
honestly i think it's very likely
i think it's very likely you can
trivialize this you can joke about i
think it's very likely that this will be
the most important political event of
our lives strategically economically
and you know culturally because this was
the question
for the 21st century
is what is the future of religion going
to be in the 22nd that's why again the
title of this video is about democracy
because there was a really hard question
for
for western democracy to ask itself here
and george w bush
came up with the wrong answer i sure
wish there had been some other country
whether it was england or italy or
france i mean i wish there had been some
other western democracy they came with
the right answer but none of them even
tried i mean george w bush didn't have a
whole lot of competition
plus when it wasn't as if something much
more intelligent approach to war in the
middle east came out of europe or canada
or south america or anywhere else
but you know this is a this is
possibly the most important question of
our times
now if i'm wrong
it would only be because an even bigger
war now begins with china
i doubt it's incredibly unlikely you
know like sure
if if a war breaks out with china that
cost two trillion dollars
then we'd be able to look back at the
war in afghanistan with its puny one
trillion
one one trillion dollar total and say
like well you know that was that really
wasn't such a big war it's true you
could now have a war trying to have such
immense scale that becomes clear the
most important question of our century
is about communism versus democracy
right but as of this moment looking back
at the last 20 years and looking for the
next twenty years it is really fair to
say this was the most important
political event of your lives it's one
of the most important economic events
just just the amount of money was spent
on this right
and there's this tremendous cultural
question that i'm asking again again on
my channel and then most of us in
western democracy are very very
comfortable with us so the second
question i wanted to ask you in terms of
um giving us a sense the seriousness and
and meaning and directions channel is
would you
sign up
to fight for the future of democracy in
afghanistan
now
today
now it's it's very difficult to imagine
a parallel universe in which we had
leaders who actually celebrated heroism
instead of
cowardice that's what we've got what
we're living through right now is the
apotheosis of cowardice now let's be
real all that anyone is saying whether
it is the present united states the
prime minister of canada the leaders of
france
england germany all that they're saying
is oh we should evacuate as many
refugees as possible 20 000 refugees 80
000 refugees we should we should run and
run and run we should retreat and
retreat and retreat the only person i've
heard with any backbone was the vice
president of afghanistan you probably
already know that the president of
afghanistan has run away apparently with
a very large amount of money i don't
know if it's in a physical suitcase or
what but he somehow transferred a huge
amount of money with him
but you know the president ran away and
the vice president stayed in afghanistan
and said that he is now assuming the
role of president which apparently is
the legal procedure um you know
apparently that is normal and he said he
would rather die with a bullet in his
front than a bullet in his back the war
is not over and that he is going to
fight to the death for his freedom
gee there sure is a lack of any verbiage
of that kind from the united states of
america or
anyone else imagine if they had been
saying that not just for the last two
months but for the last 20 years they
were saying to the afghan people look
this is your fight
this is your future this is your freedom
you know like there will be no refugees
there will be no refuge we are not going
to airlift out any of the translators
you are going to stay here and you are
going to fight to the death for the
future of your country and that's what
you're signing up for
you know that could have been the
message for 20 years leading up to this
point it's not so i digress to deal with
this that we're living through a period
of time where we're just all celebrating
cowardice and calling it human rights
that's not what human rights about okay
um
[Music]
okay
if i were to ask you if there were a
call for volunteers if we didn't have
spineless cowards for political leaders
and let me just digress on that for a
moment if we didn't have every single
one of these countries a system of
election whereby you only get one leader
you don't get to elect a separate
military leader it would make sense not
just to elect a leader for the military
but multiple we should have had
elections for who was going to lead the
war in afghanistan like so if you talk
about the american army i don't know
there's a separate division of the
american army just for africa it's
called africom
like africa command but like america has
a division of the army dealing with
colombia dealing with you know dealing
with east asia with with japan based in
okinawa it's a huge world-spanning army
as you probably know but you could you
could elect one man to be the head of
the military within the united states
you know domestically and one for
overseas contingency operations like
afghanistan no no no you're allowed to
like one guy
who do you
who do you elect barack obama
man of war can you imagine barack obama
wearing a bandolier
and being on the front lines and saying
there will be no refugees it's better to
die
with a bullet in the front of your chest
than a bullet in the back so guess what
guys we're in it for life we're in it
forget we're in it together this is your
country that you have to fight and die
for
that would have been a very different
message for the eight years obama was in
power the eight years in which obama
raised the cost of the war in
afghanistan from 14 billion a year to
over
100 billion a year and yet made the us
military less effective
very real question for democracy i don't
think anyone in the united states of
america has access to the information to
know why i don't i do not think there
are things i've done a lot of reading of
this over the years i could mention some
little isolated piece of information i
don't think there is enough transparency
in real democracy for anyone to give you
an analysis of how the budget went from
14 billion a year to over 100 billion it
was like 105 i mean it wasn't way over
it was just slightly over a hundred
billion but over a hundred billion
dollars a year and yet became less
effective obviously there were terrible
strategic decisions made both
politically and just strategic in the
sense of military uh strategy narrow
narrowly defined you know barack obama
was obviously the wrong man to elect to
win this war
in some other parallel universe george w
bush could have been a tremendously
competent person to win the war his
father was the head of the cia in case
you hadn't heard it's certainly possible
that george w bush could have grown up
with a deep understanding of cia black
ops
strategic and military considerations
but george w bush was the wrong man to
lead this war we're probably gonna have
to come back to that later in this issue
he was the wrong man ethically he was
the wrong man religiously like he was
the wrong man culturally there's his
level of sophistication it's wrong man
linguistically do any of these guys
speak a second language
how many languages does barack obama
speak have you ever i've never even
heard him speak spanish george w bush
could speak a little spanish i've heard
him speak spanish i've never heard
barack obama speak any other language
but you know
i just say you can imagine the type of
man who would have been necessary to
lead the united states to victory in
afghanistan and it's not george w bush
and it's not barack obama and it's of
course i mean donald trump
of course it's not donald trump but also
by the time donald trump was in power he
was just looking for the exit door he
wasn't trying to win he was playing to
lose and trying to lose under his
preferred conditions that was all that
was going on at that stage
um
so the question i'm asking here this is
question number two of two is
would you
join the army today and fight for the
future of afghanistan i i'm going to
tell you my honest answer and some of
you i think will just never thought of
this before right
the real question is
what afghanistan
are you fighting for the future of
if if you tell me
that you're going to fight a war
to get rid of
an orthodox muslim tyranny
and replace it
with a government that is
as orthodox islamic
and deeply corrupt and just barely
democratic
but i don't know if you guys have
googled this i have i've read all this
i've read about this i've read a lot of
united nations reports on what was going
on in afghanistan yeah you know look up
when the last time they had mayoral
elections in afghanistan was and when
they had elections at all and how many
people actually got to vote in the
elections in afghanistan give you
nightmares and then they had a kind of
fig leaf symbolic commitment to
democracy there was barely any democracy
so to fight against the taliban to
replace it with an american client state
that is 95 percent as muslim
and
it's only 10
more democratic that doesn't really
interest me so much
for me to fight and kill and possibly
die
in the name of the government of like
hamid karzai
are you are you joking like that's
that's what you want me to fight for
that's what you want me to create
to try to create a republic in
afghanistan
where once the war is over if you
actually went where i would never go on
vacation why would never take my own
kids on vacation like it would be in
because oh no no this is a horrible
muslim fundamentalist place you would
never
that that really doesn't appeal to many
people that doesn't drum up
a lot of support
um
as i have this memory i think it was
from
now
i know september 11th 2001
i'll tell you on that political issue
throughout the whole year of 2002 it
felt like september 11th had been five
five minutes ago i've been five weeks
ago you know what i mean like time stood
still and like you could talk to people
2002 even early 2003 and it seemed like
september 11 happened yesterday i
remember i talked
to a stripper
in 2002. uh this is in
i won't say where
she was a white canadian stripper okay
and uh i could google her maybe she's
maybe she's not only fans maybe she's a
web
we're about this conversation and when
you talk to strippers
i got respect i got respect for
strippers i got respect for sex workers
i got respect for
some people
you know but when you talk to strippers
one of the things is their job in our
culture they often have to chit chat
with clients
and sometimes they kind of switch into
saying something that they've said to
like 50 clients before like it gets a
good result like like within
conversation so it's not special to
strippers probably if you talk to a
therapist it's like that too like every
zombie your therapist does what a
hairstyle yeah melissa give the example
of hairstyles yeah uh you know you talk
to a hairstylist and they kind of
chitchat with people every day and
there's something but remember i talked
to the stripper
and the war in afghanistan came up and
she said in this like
smug self-congratulatory way she said
by the time this war is over you won't
be able to find a single copy of the
koran on this earth
i mean she and you know you can imagine
i was already a
long time ago it was already this kind
of sophisticated cynical person about
politics and you know like i'm i'm kind
of trying to ask polite questions but
it's like
you really think this is a war to
destroy islam like you really think
that's what america is even trying to do
like let alone what's what's going to
happen like what the og like you know
and she did i mean she she thought
obviously she had no access to
information aside from the news or maybe
she was in the talk radio or something
you know um
oh that's interesting sorry it's good
it's a nice distraction but someone in
the audience says obama claims he used
to be fluent in bahasa indonesia
i don't
i don't believe him unless he can show
receipts i really doubt obama can speak
can speak that language
easy language to learn one of the
easiest languages in asia or in the
world if you don't aren't a native
speaker of the of the family but still
yeah yeah i know i know but
um
anyway yeah it was funny talking to
someone who from her perspective really
actually thought that this was a war
but i mean
well right no no but here's what we're
gonna ask is
do you think of this as a war between
christendom and islam
or do you think of this as a war between
atheism
as an islam yeah i mean okay okay
secularism
what do we mean by secular we mean
atheism i mean come come on can we just
be honest about it like
[Music]
all right
now you know if we could be
honest about it
you know
would you join the army would you fight
to create a genuinely secular genuinely
atheist democratic republic in
afghanistan oh
now i'm interested now you're talking to
me about something that's worth fighting
for and worth dying for and maybe you
could recruit people from all over the
world you know i'm certainly within
central asia even maybe you'd then have
a cause that would really divide things
along very clear lines
now a significant percentage of um
[Music]
people in afghanistan would be highly
motivated to support the taliban if you
made that clear if you said look this
isn't a muslim
republic like 95 as muslim as the
taliban that happens to be the client of
the american government this is really
truly an american-style
secular atheist
democracy
there would be people who instead of
being wishy-washy about which side they
want to support would then adamantly
decide that they want to support the
taliban and fight against that
and you know what i say
good all right
progress requires disambiguation so make
clear choices progress requires clear
lines of demarcation and instead what
we've had is is one lie after another so
just just very briefly i don't think
anyone is going to find this
controversial
the war started with a very different
premise
and that premise was revenge
right so people were recruited
at the start of the war say 2001 to 2003
and not just americans
italians belarusians you know across
europe across the nato alliance and
around the world people were recruited
to support the american side
for the sake of revenge and you could
definitely make an argument that within
a year or two certainly by 2003 they had
accomplished okay you had your revenge
you bombed and killed a bunch of people
mostly random people mostly innocent
people it's war
right
and now you can pack up and go home
and i think that's why the budget was so
low
in the first several years of the george
w bush period revenge is cheap
now i think that it's a great mistake
to describe what happened next as
nation building
this is a ponderously vague
phrase what happened next it's it's
classically
quintessentially american
right the british don't think this way
the italians don't think this way the
germans don't think this way
what the americans did
was to conflate
conquest
with charity
no other country in the world
can conflate conquest with charity
because they know
what it is to be conquered
germans know what it is to be conquered
italians know what it is to be conquered
oh you say the french won world war ii
no they lost twice france was conquered
twice in world war ii all these other
countries have a sense of the real
significance of conquest of the power
and the powerlessness and the
opportunity to change things forever
that ensues for a short time
after that after that conquest right
americans
invaded
haiti
and they told themselves it was a
charity
and they believed it
and they still
believe it to this day
just over
100 years ago not ancient history but
over 100 years ago the americans invaded
the philippines
and they told themselves
it was a
charity and they believed it and they
still believe it to this day
when the americans fought in the korean
war
they told themselves it was a charity
they didn't even want to refer to it as
a war
they called it a police action
they invented the term peacekeeping
and police action
they were so resolute in creating this
illusion that the korean war was not a
war
that they had the japanese
police
fight in the war alongside them
and that was only a few months after the
japanese had signed their commitment
that they would never have an army and
would never participate in any war ever
again
at the end of world war ii japan made
that commitment because the united
states forced them to they become a
pacifist nation oh yeah but but but you
can still fight in in korea because it's
not a war
it's it's charity
still to this day it's possible it's
possible this has changed in the last
five years or something but to my
knowledge still to this day if you go to
the american library of congress the
most important library in in washington
dc
you will never see the vietnam war
categorized as or referred to as a war
the vietnam war we still pretend was not
a war it was a police action or it was a
conflict okay
um
back on september 12
2001.
the idea of a war with afghanistan was
incredibly popular in the united states
incredibly popular with the american
people incredibly popular with senators
and
congressmen they would have they would
if you had a referendum if you had
direct democracy americans would have
gladly voted
to start that war they didn't
they didn't declare war
at all
the war in afghanistan followed the same
pattern
the war in afghanistan was not a war
americans didn't admit to themselves it
was a war
it started off
as revenge
and then what it morphed into the
cultural trope that took over is this
incredibly powerful cross current in the
american imagination that it's not a war
at all
that it's not conquest
that it's a charity
now
i'm going to argue against myself most
youtubers don't do this most youtubers
present the argument of this and it
seems strong then you just let it stand
there unchallenged i challenge my own
ideas i argue against my myself and in
that sense you get to see the limits of
what it is i'm doing here you get to see
that it's true but it's only true up to
a point
all right i had a friend i might as well
say who this was but
i had a friend who was a very old german
man i've mentioned it before he was a
small child during world war ii but most
of his memories were of the aftermath of
world of tanks he did have childhood
memories of world war ii but then he was
really paying attention uh immediately
after world war tv was old enough to
understand what was going on politically
and so on as the rubble was being
cleared away so to speak
and um
i remember
he said to me passionately
this is a guy who's been to vietnam many
times he said to me passionately that
the americans could have won the war in
vietnam
if only they had been willing to engage
in more brutality
if only they'd been willing to really
kill people who were their enemies and
who had wronged them you know that the
the americans that were too humanitarian
in their in their approach to her
and this was my way of talking at the
time the way i talked to people was
changed a bit
and i sat there and said
what about you
he is confused
i said
what about your mother and your father
and you
you were our enemies
when we conquered you
how were you treated
everyone knows everyone knows the
germans were treated better than the
vietnamese i mean when you think about
it
this is a crucial part of this american
misconception that conquest is charity
because the minute you conquer the
germans you start to be behaving like
you're there to save them
they're there to rebuild the german
economy west german east germany was
conquered by the soviet you're there to
make it into a showcase for how great
cop capitalism and democracy can be this
contrast between east germany and west
germany exactly the same pattern in
north korea versus south korea the
minute you
conquer you don't want revenge you don't
want to massacre them you don't even
really want to put anyone in prison and
a puny percentage of the members of the
nazi party were put on trial at
nuremberg a merely symbolic number of
people were put on trial and executed
but i was saying to this guy seriously i
said look
what do you think
the people of vietnam
ever did to us
that we would want to massacre them
now think about what you did to us
literally you and your mother and your
father
and you explained to me
why we didn't kill you
or why we didn't permanently
occupy your country why we didn't loot
and pillage i mean you could make it
into a province you could make it into a
territory the united states make it you
know you could colonize it in that sense
we could force you all to speak english
it could have been the end of the german
language could forcibly assimilate you
that said we could we could do all kinds
of terrible things to you you know we
could have changed germany forever we
paid the price in blood nobody has ever
done to us
anything as terrible as what the germans
did and nobody has ever done to kind of
the fabric of human morality as terrible
anything as terrible as the german i
admit
joseph stalin it's close contact mao
zedong it's
nevertheless nevertheless there is
something uniquely you know
mind-blowingly atrocious about the
atrocities of of the nazis and adolf
hitler so you know you want to talk to
me about revenge you want to talk to me
bro brutality i'm sorry what did we do
to you
and now you tell me how you want us to
treat others
how do you expect us to treat the
vietnamese or the people of afghanistan
or the people of iraq all those wars
were more ongoing at that time
now i think this is worth talking about
primarily because nobody in america
thinks it through
nobody mentates it and if you want the
weirdest one of all look at the the
reconciliation process that happened in
italy all right italy continued to be
completely full of fascists it was
completely dominated by fascists and
nobody cared like nobody in america was
interested in like enforcing some kind
of systemic reform on italy it was just
like well war is over and by the way the
number of years that went by between
when combat ceased and the working out
of the final peace treaty so you had an
armistice and then later you had the
treaty all these years went by and there
were these weird negotiations and you
know guess what the italians didn't
change an italian government you know
why okay we killed all these people and
our own people died and there's a cost
of
untold billions of dollars
okay why don't we have a beach in italy
why isn't part of italy a colony of
canada forever you know why sir let's go
back to 18th century 19th century rules
oh i'm sorry why shouldn't the borders
of the netherlands be expanded
permanently to take a piece of germany
that's the way we used to settle wars
would be to divide up germany and france
gets part and the netherlands gets part
and the united states gets pardoned
canada gets all the contributing armies
but including adjacent armies would
divide up the land of the conquered
enemy nation that started the war that's
how we used to do things yeah we used to
also reduce people to slavery i mean
that was how we used to get even at the
end of war slavery serfdom you know you
become a second-class citizen in your
own country and be forced to speak
someone else's language you could have a
part of germany where everyone's forced
to speak dutch another part where
everyone's forced to speak french and so
on that's how wars used to end america
changed that forever
in this totally bizarre
unexamined way
now in the 20th century
i just went nobody else was playing by
america's rules
nobody else had this misconception of
humanitarian warfare conquest is charity
nobody else did so you know if you look
at the way russia fought wars and
obviously you have the tsarist period
and then you have the communist period
but in the communist period the way
foreign policy works it's exactly the
same
where wars are fought fundamentally to
move the border like that's you know
it's basically what it is
russia has a war with poland russia has
a war with finland you know there are
all these crummy soviet wars russia has
wars you know what you can look at have
any of you ever looked at a map of where
russia's border with japan is
the closest country to japan the closest
foreign country is russia because russia
kept all of the land they marched over
they they own several islands of japan
including the enormous sackland island
which has priceless oil and gas reserves
priceless billions and billions and
billions of trillions of dollars worth
of gasoline even if there's nothing else
good about sacko and island and its
neighboring islands oh gee why
at the end of world war ii
the russians
kept
part of japan
in both world war one and world war ii
russia's borders expanded
permanently
and think they were the bad guys
remember
why why didn't america's borders expand
why didn't canada's why didn't england
what about france i mean france kind of
lost twice man you could make it well
how about you know the netherlands or
anyone else who fought against the nazis
they weren't rewarded
you see on a really deep level the
unspoken unwritten rules of war
changed and they didn't make sense
anymore after america conquered
afghanistan what was supposed to happen
next on a deep unexamined level in the
mind of an idiot like george w bush it
was the same answer as for south korea
it was the same answer as for south
vietnam it was the same answer as for
the philippines as for haiti as for
germany as for italy as for japan
the idea was just like japan at the end
of world war ii again the part conquered
by russia
permanently became part of russia it
still is today it wasn't just during the
soviet period not just during the
congress but still today
it's part of russia and they kicked out
all the japanese people it's inhabited
by white blonde russian people i'm not
joking
it's really i mean nobody calls it
genocide i mean it's a small scale
dude sacklin island is enormous compared
to the rest of japan i'm just saying
it's not a small island it's
anyway it's like fifty percent of the
landmass japan or sometimes it's
slightly exaggeration still it's huge
just look at them
size of sackland island versus the size
of hokkaido you know it's huge
and that's and there were no japanese
people there anymore all right
you know they extirpated the japanese
population and replaced them with
russians that's that's what happened
america didn't do that to japan
right
america played this very strange game
that they also played in
italy in germany and so on which is that
they presided over
the writing of a new constitution and
then they pretended that they could step
back and say okay you guys take it from
here and that america would then play
this charitable role of building
universities and building hospitals and
helping industry get back on street and
exporting tobacco and all this other all
this other crap so i'm just
yeah so if someone watches this video
200 years from now in the future they'd
be like this why is this guy saying this
all this stuff is obvious it's not
obvious to us okay right now in 2021
this is not obvious to anyone and it
wasn't obvious to george w bush and it
wasn't obvious to barack obama you know
there was that old anti-war song from
the 1970s the vietnam war era you know
uh one two three four what the hell are
we fighting for nobody knows
nobody knows anymore and i ask these two
questions to start what one what if this
is the most important political event in
your lifetime two
would you sign up would you fight would
you be willing to fight and the question
for what
what the hell are we fighting for you
know
you gotta have an answer for that you
have to have an answer at the at the
beginning of the war of course in the
middle of the end of the war you still
but you have to have a clear answer for
that and for the united states of
america it never was to create freedom
of speech in afghanistan such as you
have in las vegas you couldn't george w
bush would never be able to do this you
could have had someone who stepped
forward and said look we are going to
fight this war and when we're done
guess what we support atheism we support
a secular government we support
afghanistan having a society where
pornography and rock and roll music and
gambling and
prostitution and neon signs are all
legal
we are going to make
the city of kabul
into the the taliban's worst nightmare
not something just five percent
different not moderate islam
supported by church
there's nothing moderate about islam in
afghanistan know that we'll actually
create an outpost for democracy for
secularism for atheism
for human rights
think about what that word really means
it's ridiculous you know we're going to
create something worth fighting for
and then you get to ask who's with us
and you get to find out who's against us
right
you say we're going to actually create
we're gonna create universities that
aren't universities of moderate islam
but universities that are really in this
sense shockingly challengingly
democratic and then start to think about
what that does and you know what hey you
know again i'm just saying
it it's so easy to demonize colonialism
it's so easy
right what i have to say to you is what
the united states has done in the last
20 years is worse than colonialism
any of us i'm sorry i
i know i know you people haven't done
the reading i've done i mean like i'm
not saying this consult you but like i
don't know if when you think about
colonialism
you're thinking what i'm thinking okay
all right what the united states did in
afghanistan last 20 years it is worse
than colonialism and i i can prove it
very simply to you how many of you know
a white person who learned and became
fluent in any of the languages of
afghanistan can you go to a university
in texas or in ottawa i mean include
canada or in vancouver
that is teaching
any of the languages of afghanistan all
right as bad as colonialism might be
it involves people going to that country
and learning the language and getting
married and having kids who are half
afghan and half american or whatever the
combination may be half black half
afghans have black people going over
there and really living with them and
really learning their language and
really changing their culture and where
they also have some kind of positive
relationship with us maybe maybe we
start having more afghan restaurants i
don't know there's something positive
they can bring i i like afghan flatbread
i'm vegan but the flatbread and i just
mentioned
if you if you can get it vegan you know
what i'm saying
um
[Music]
you know i i completely understand why
colonialism has the bad reputation it
does i am living in a country built on
genocide
don't get me wrong but
in the same way that i am morally
opposed to aristocracy
but i end up having to kind of defend
aristocracy to explain to people what it
really was
and how it worked
you know
uh because aristocrats were not just
parasites they weren't vampires they
weren't evil they played this incredibly
important positive role in our society
and we destroyed them and we destroyed
everything they'd accomplished and the
whole society they created there's
really a tragedy there and if you have
real
human sympathy and empathy and you
really do research and engage in
analysis you can understand
you you can understand that really the
world was coming to an end for them as
we the next generation arguing for
democracy and meritocracy and republican
ideals we destroyed their world you know
to to create our own
i completely understand the way in which
you know colonialism now seems laughably
outmoded it's laughable in the same way
aristocracy is right
it just
we can't think of colonialism as
anything but
a hated
relic from the past but it's still worth
questioning what if we have what if we
have a system or a lack of a system what
if we've done something that's actually
worse than colonials what if when we
compare it to what actually would be
accomplished in 20 years of overt
colonialism you know what if that would
be something better than what it is
we've got now
okay guys i'm
got a nice quote from that song too you
know um
all right guys i'm going to take a
minute to read what's in the what's in
the comment section
melissa you want to you want to chime in
i was just going to say i i know i said
at the beginning this
i'm making this partly because i got a
bunch of emotionally overwrought emails
from people
you know
i i'm emotionally overwrought about it
too i made it live stream back on august
13th about it it means a lot to me
emotionally i mean it's not it's not
just politics it's not just theory you
know or what have you you know we have
31 people in the audience guys if you
want to take a moment to hit the thumbs
up button if you change your mind later
you can change it thumbs down i'm just
now going to take a minute to pay more
attention to your counseling let's do
something
i'm really glad
but i know you have not mentioned
terrorism um
right
so this is actually a good example most
of raising something i didn't say
because i don't think in those terms so
melissa raised an interesting point she
said that um i haven't used the word
terrorism once there's 50 minutes into
the stream and she said it was indeed
originally kind of propagandized as and
promoted the public has
pardoned me the war on terrorism and
then she's asking um to what extent are
we actually safer from terrorism
and of course of course we're not
of course instead it's it's justified
terrorism and expanded terrorism and
increased funding for terrorism and
within that part of the world you know
it created the whole phenomenon of isis
sort of isis was the most amazing
blossoming of both muslim fundamentalism
and and terrorism imaginable and that
was i mean it was unanticipated and
unprecedented out of the ashes of the
american conquest of iraq
you know um the isis phenomenon emerged
um
and was for a short time it was
tremendously successful and then even
more money had to be spent on american
uh uh
aggression against it so look you know
okay
why do i not talk about terrorism
um
you know
okay
i think that the terrorism
optic or categorization
it exactly serves this
this same end
of a lighting
i'm going to use some could use some
great scrap boards here
alighting
obviating and obfuscating three great
words alighting obviating and
obfuscating the question of whether or
not we are fighting a war for atheism
right
so you know
if you really believe this is a war
against terrorism and i think george w
bush personally did believe that george
w bush was a profoundly christian person
i'm not saying because i have any
respect for it but he was a he was a
devout
christian extremist frankly all right
and what he said again and he he really
believed was he was only fighting a war
against terrorism he wasn't fighting a
war against islam he wasn't fighting a
war for atheism he wasn't fighting a war
for a secular society he didn't even
want that within the united states of
america so just just to give one
illustration we could talk for an hour
about the religious conscience of george
w bush but you know he removed
the division between church and state
that that formerly so so so i have to
finish that sentence it's more of a
sense but um prior to george w bush
um
if you had a soup kitchen
so a soup kitchen is an american
convention where you are giving soup and
food to poor people homeless people
that's called a soup kitchen but if you
had a if you had a church run charity
giving away food to homeless people and
you also uh preached the bible or
preached salvation or something you had
to physically separate them and you also
had to legally separate them you
couldn't you couldn't have them together
and you actually saw that in action in
the united states of america you know
the separation church and state at that
level of how charities were run so it's
not even church and state but the
separation of religion from these from
these other functions um that that was
necessary down the line so he actually
removed that where for the first time
you could integrate those into one
service now in other countries around
the world in canada there isn't that
there isn't that requirement services
and everything and you know when i was
living in cambodia and laos and so on it
was a big deal he removed the separation
of church and state in another
significant thing which is that he he
made it illegal for the government the
united states to support any kind of
charity work development work any any
kind of program anywhere in the world
related to abortion
um as i recall i'm sorry i forget the
precise word i think it was also
anti-condom i think it was about like
they wouldn't do anything related to
[Music]
pregnancy like it was defined in some
way like that so it was it was meant to
be abortion but it really got rid of
things related to
birth control pills and things like that
too you know some christian
fundamentalists in america they think
birth control pills are also a form of
abortion in there they're morally
opposed to them for that reason so i'm
just giving these as examples they said
to which george washed personally he was
he was devoutly christian and he was
trying to do he was trying to
christianize the united states and
american politics whether or not he
succeeded it's up to you and i remember
when when he left office and obama came
back in power everyone in like cambodia
and laos and that kind of charity was
like
finally now we can go back to doing
abortion and
and uh condom related stuff you know and
birth control phil stuff you know like
there was this really weird period role
that was um
uh religiously charged so you know the
idea that it is possible
to fight a war on terrorism as opposed
to a war against islam or a war for
atheism
right
you know this this is a delusion right
now you know um
this this is a
profoundly related question
okay
did the united states
fight a war
against fascism
in world war ii
well at the end of world war ii
what did they actually do to get rid of
the fascists
in italy
all those guys were still alive
i'm sorry so what percentage of italian
fascists were put in prison or given a
trial
absolutely minuscule you know nothing
changed within germany too
bureaucrats and
mayors
they had worked in the nazi regime
in italy too
if you were actually fighting a war
against fascism right the final outcomes
of that war and what you would really do
yeah i'm not i'm not necessarily saying
you'd have to kill all those people but
you would have to do something to
actually eliminate fascism and the
americans didn't
the americans again it's this really
strange delusion of what what is victory
what is conquest and then what is
charity
you know the idea was that they just
show up they sign a piece of paper with
the italians declaring the start of a
new
era in history
and then they presume that because of
the guiding light of america's morally
superior example
the italians will just sort themselves
out and fascism will disappear
now you know the only thing i'd say is
japan
was a success story
maybe
japan is the only example in the world
where this american method works
take a look at haiti
take a look at the philippines let me
take
take a look at american interventions
everywhere but even i know sorry i know
it's not a military intervention well
okay then i won't let's not okay i won't
include non-military intervention
but you know um well take a look at
cambodia
take a look at former yugoslavia i mean
any of these things the american idea of
what winning the war means and what what
the outcomes were so you know i i do
think
i do think the idea of a war on
terrorism is really a dangerous idea
you know
um
there are intelligent people everywhere
there are free thinkers everywhere
there are homosexuals everywhere
homosexuals matter
a lot more than what you'll hear right
now on the nightly news it's all the
[ __ ] about oh but what about the
women in afghanistan who want to become
career you know want to have a career
and want to go to university and stuff
what what do you think happens to the
homosexuals in afghanistan i haven't
heard that mentioned
once
not
once in any of the news coverage not
once homosexual homosexuals and lesbians
whatever treating it as the broadest the
broadest possible ever how about
transgender people it's all it's so
fashionable to say we care about
transgender and cross-dressing people
what if you're transgender or
cross-dressing in afghanistan in 2021
huh how's that going to work under under
taliban dominion
for some reason no interested in asking
these questions you know
if you think
nobody
in afghanistan in the last 20 years has
been questioning why should you have
an islamic society at all you're wrong
now i'd also mention that in the last 20
years the population of afghanistan
almost doubled
so the percentage of people in
afghanistan alive today
who were alive 30 years ago is
incredibly small it's a young population
who mostly grew up in the conditions of
this war and the conditions of this this
american mission
and i'm sorry i may have mentioned it
too briefly but it's because i feel
everyone already knows it you also know
that america really discredited itself
morally ethically and so on in terms of
use of torture in terms of the the
actual ways and means
um employed in the war but yeah
look
there is no such thing as a war on
terrorism there's a war against islam
and there's a war positively to create
democracy to create secular atheist
societies to create more highly educated
societies create more modern societies
to create societies that are integrated
into uh neighboring states and cultures
in the modern world
and you know i'll just say um
[Music]
i have a lot to say okay i'll read i'll
read the comments
all right good so guys i'm just reading
this in order but i'm catching up pretty
quickly uh there's a sincere comment
here from henry gann
so henry says quote the hubris of
america
is that the world wants to be just like
us
um
i don't think that is
the hubris of the united states of
america
okay and let's let's get real
okay
everyone wants to vote
everyone wants to be able to complain
that the government is corrupt
and to have their complaint matter and
have their complaint make a difference
i'm going to take a further step here if
you're familiar with plato and socrates
this will make more sense to you okay
everyone wants that
even if they don't think they do
you can reveal it through pretty quick
you know um
socratic method so
egypt
is profoundly culturally alien from
england france
canada
profoundly i think people underestimate
just how culturally different the
egyptians are from us
okay
egyptians want to vote
egyptians want to be able to control
their government and hold it accountable
if they want to be able to complain
and have their complaints matter whether
that's about corruption or otherwise
they do not want to be powerless before
a small class of of multi-millionaires
you know there are rich people there are
poor people in egypt there are also some
incredibly rich people they want to have
a government that is by the poor for the
poor of the poor and that represents the
interests of the masses the rep
represents the people as a whole
against the money delete and against the
elite within government itself you know
elite elite people were
they do want that
okay
and
you can talk to some egyptians who don't
think they do
you can talk to egyptians
who will tell you that as a matter of
religious conviction they feel that they
shouldn't have any role in government at
all they should just leave it all up to
god it's a very common
belief in that part of the muslim world
i just mentioned in egypt specifically
in its and its neighbors you can imagine
what a convenient religious belief that
is to have one of total passivity
towards politics because you say it's
it's up to god to decide this thing but
if you sit down and talk to those people
about you know socratic method about
real life situations and they will have
been through some of them
okay
what if your son
disappears
and then you find out that he's been
beaten and interrogated
and after being beaten and tortured he's
confessed to a crime
and the crime happened in a different
town
and you can prove from the records on
his phone like text messages he sent and
maybe he uploaded some photos to
instagram that he wasn't in that town he
was in another town but he's been beaten
and he's already
confessed
and if you say this to people
it probably hasn't happened to their own
son they know people you know their
cousin they know somebody or they
whether it's in the newspaper or their
friend's friend don't know
horrifying terrible stories like this
about how awful the quality of
government and policing is in egypt how
deep corruption was this this kind of
thing you can come with all kinds of
examples there are two businesses and
one of them's connected through
corruption to a military official and
one of them isn't and then you know but
bad things happen to people so you know
if you sit down and talk to them even
someone who tells you is a matter of
religious conviction that they don't
want democracy
if you can explain to them
what democracy is in that way
when they understand it they will
understand that they do want
democracy because the alternative is to
live in fear
how does this thing you know sorry laos
laos is a communist country
everyone lives in fear
china communist china in many ways a
wonderful place to live
but let me tell you something people
live in fear
and i've said this before on the channel
so saying it very briefly when you
really get to know china
foreigners won't understand this at
first if you're an american you just
arrive what you realize is the higher up
the socioeconomic pyramid people are the
more afraid they are the more they live
in fear people in china who are
university professors live in fear of
the government all the time it's really
it's really scary you know so you know i
understand what you're saying here you
said quote the hubris of america is
thinking that
you know the rest of the world wants to
be like us okay democracy is not a
haircut
not everyone wants to have an american
democracy is not a tattoo
not everyone wants to have
american tattoos okay everyone wants to
have
democracy everyone even if they don't
think they do
all right
and
you know
a huge part of politics
is making decisions
on other people's behalf
for their good
for their benefit
like if you don't believe that some
people get to make decisions for others
because it's in everyone's best interest
or it's because it's in their best
interest then you don't believe in
politics you know
politics is centrally and integrally
and inextricably
about coercion so i had a little i had a
little slip up there didn't integrally
politics is about coercion
now in the absence of democracy politics
is only about coercion when you have
democracy it's also about participation
and consultation that's about a lot of
other things not just
all right
okay so look um
someone called uh paco miera xvida says
so i'm going to read your old comment
paco
if i may call you paco
uh
quote talk about reagan funding
reactionary terrorists like hekmiatar or
abandoning masood after omar muhammad
again ascendancy over afghanistan the
cia betrayal of abdul haq or how u.s
foreign policy hit okay paco
okay
now i'm asking you
two very simple questions right
and one of them is
are you willing to sign up and fight for
democracy yourself
like in the context of these discussions
i hate to tell you but like there is a
sense in which
the moral record
of the united states or england you
think i like the british empire i'm
living in a country built on british
empire genocide but it is almost
irrelevant to this question now
looking forward the sense in which it's
relevant is it gives us a sense of their
biases their limited confidence and
capabilities and attitudes going
the past does
matter in that way but you know
however however much you may want to
fault or impugn the character the united
states of america
you know the united states did commit
atrocities during world war ii the
united states did commit atrocities
in what we could now call the korean war
the war between north korea and south
korea okay
would you prefer to live in north korea
or south korea
would you be willing to fight for the
future of democracy in south korea i
would
i'd fight for south korea why just
because it's a secular democracy
no other reason
you know i don't have to like korean
food or something i don't have to change
my haircut you know i mean i it doesn't
have to be any other reason than that
the the difference between south korea
and north korea is worth fighting for
something i've been saying again again
in this video in slightly different
words is
the tragedy of the war george w bush
designed and created was that the
difference between the american
supported side in afghanistan and the
taliban wasn't worth fighting for it was
to slight a difference there was the
taliban there was another government
that was 95 the same as the taliban
right
so i could say north afghanistan versus
south afghanistan to simplify or
something right um the difference
between urban afghanistan and rural
afghanistan wasn't worth fighting for
the difference between north and south
korea is worth fighting for i have read
detailed accounts of massacres of
innocent civilians
by the americans
in korea
north and south korea
i have you you may or may not have you
can take the time to do it you know i'm
i'm aware of that
but these are the decisions we have to
make right now i i do think there's a
much more important nuanced difficult
decision to make about democracy itself
democracy in america democracy in canada
which is what i'm getting at with the
title this video but in a really simple
sense i think people like you paco have
to face up the fact that no matter how
many massacres the americans carried out
in korea
north korea is still wrong and south
korea is still right because that is how
important democracy really is all right
i remember reading a dedicated article
um talking about the position india was
in
shortly after world war ii
it was difficult it got more difficult
and i now know more about this today
than i did at the time
but it was saying
you know india was in this position
where they were being asked to become an
ally of the united states of america and
at that time america was so racist
that like political leaders from india
couldn't even go and visit america and
walk around like a normal person you
know they were they were treated as
black and they were treated with even
more hostility because they didn't
understand the social cues like you know
they didn't understand oh no this is a
whites only restaurant they didn't
understand oh no you can't walk in here
at all or oh no you have to take off
your hat and meekly ask them to make
lunch in the kitchen and a brown paper
bag for you to take out but you can't
actually walk into the restaurant there
were all these weird barriers and social
cues for just how intensely racist the
united states of america was and there
were these very difficult debates
in india where people these are people
within the government elite within the
military
we're basically saying look
like in a lot of ways the united states
of america is evil it's evil and it's
built on
slavery and it's still
unbelievably racist today and the race
is against us and we're not natural
allies
but
this democracy thing is so important
that we must be in an alliance with
america against russia against china etc
it was a very difficult argument to make
and it was a very very shaky
relationship between the united states
and india and in 1971 it broke down and
america and india became enemies in 1971
but there's a period between
india's independence and 1971 were
this very full match so again my point
is there and you can just imagine
viscerally personally what it would be
like to be a brown skinned person from
india or possibly a dark black skin
person i mean their variation in their
complexion and to go and visit america
in the year
1955 or something
you know and to be treated that way and
where you can stand on the bus
and whether or not you can take a taxi
and you know where you can sit and where
you can
eat
and whether or not you can swim in the
hotel swimming pool all the miserable
racist forms of oppression and oh no oh
you need to see a dentist while you're
here or a medical oh no you can't go to
that that you have to go to the black
people's
like the reality of what it was like
being in the united states of america if
you were from india you were an ally it
was unbelievably evil and unbelievably
demoralizing and of course beyond that
even when there wasn't formal racism
there was all the informal racism and
people in india had to really say wow
this is our ally
this is democracy
so i mean what america represents today
it's something much more positive than
in
you know and
you know this does not mean that i have
infinite patience for
massacres committed by the united states
of america in the name of democracy nor
torture
but
my complaint there is simply
fundamentally that we don't have enough
democracy that what we need is more
democracy not less
in order to have armies and foreign
policy that makes sense democratically
that's transparent and accountable and
adaptable uh democratically okay
um
sorry so i'm reading ahead in the
comments now guys
all right looks like there are a lot of
quality comments here
okay so again i'll read this from from
paco again so paco says
quote afghanistan is where u.s foreign
policy revealed itself as self-serving
close quote
paco
are you 12 years old
what do you mean u.s foreign policy
revealed itself as self-serving
u.s foreign policy
is self-serving
who else do you think they're serving
you think they're serving saudi arabia
like who do you think they're working
for
the american government works for itself
and once in a while it works for the
american people
i'm sorry i mean this just makes me
think you're 12 years old
what do you what do you think
yeah this is not a secret you know
american foreign policy is supposed to
serve america's self-interest
this ain't something new
that just came out of nowhere
okay so william again i you know i uh
i i sympathized the comment but i
totally disagree with that so you'll see
but it's a well intentioned coming from
williams says the taliban wasn't smart
enough to give up their radicalism and
accept the charity that would have been
given to them he then says we helped uh
rebuild japan after the atom bomb and
the fire bombing of tokyo et cetera so
so william the sense in which i
sympathize with you is you you've
correctly understood part of what i was
saying earlier and saying america was
trying to repeat the same pattern that
you saw in the conquest of japan and the
writing of a new constitution for japan
and so on and then japan really japan
really in a profound meaningful sense
ceasing to be a fascist country that the
total moral regeneration of japan you
could say within 20 years it is i think
unique in the history of the world i
think it didn't happen in italy i think
it didn't happen in greece i mean you
can look at a lot of countries after
world war ii and you can say they
changed a lot less after world war ii
than they should have and you could talk
about what happened in west germany you
know too to what extent you have a
veneer of democracy painted over fascism
and just real live fascists there to
live there now i think i think 50 years
later germany has changed a lot um by
the way that's kind of kind of another
story but i say immediately you're
talking about the 10 or 20 years after
um
okay so william i think that the mistake
you're making here is just
you're accepting the propaganda
narrative that this was something other
than a war on islam
it was a war on islam it still is a war
on islam and it's a war for
atheism
and the problem is that none of the
western democracies that exist today
actually identify as atheists none of
them can say that and none of them have
their own constitutions written that way
right the relationship between church
and state in the united in america in
england in france in germany none of
these countries can claim to represent
atheism or even secularism and they that
wasn't
that wasn't effectively what they were
fighting for but when you accept that as
the primary basic premise of what was
going on in this war
then of course of course what do you
mean the taliban can't compromise
for them this isn't just life and death
this is about their immortal soul
you know they are they are fighting and
they are dying and imagining they're
going to heaven forever and they'll they
will do anything for the future of that
illusion you know so there there is no
negotiating with the taliban this is the
hard limit of democracy these are the
people who can never participate in
elections and can never negotiate and
can never compromise that's why we're at
war with the taliban and you know the
same is going to be true with hamas
i know so i was laughing the other day
because a natural vegan a vegan youtuber
made this ridiculous video where she was
claiming that buying a certain brand of
hummus was preventing negotiations that
would bring bring peace to the
israeli-palestine conflict i was like i
was laughing a lot and say oh yeah right
negotiations with who
negotiations with hamas there would have
been these great negotiations of the
mess you know
it's just it's just ridiculous so by the
way guys we've got uh 38 people in the
audience now we only have 17 thumbs up i
mean you know
you guys have been enjoying this for
over an hour so if you hit the thumbs up
button it'll it'll help the channel and
help more people discover the video
i mean if you hate the video you've been
listening for more than an hour so thank
you
um but it would kind of make sense to
hit the thumbs up button as i said
before if i say something that really
shocks you you can you can send me an
email you know you can talk to me now
you can talk to me now in the comment
section but it's something something
more serious you want to discuss with me
about you can send me an email you can
contact me through patreon and you can
change your mind later and undo uh
hitting the thumbs up button
uh but yeah i think at this point it's
reasonable for me to for me to ask
okay so right frida is making an
interesting point i say this kind of
thing to melissa all the time so frida
many people on the left
try to misrepresent the current era of
american imperialism as if it were
traditional colonialism
and it's not it can never the analysis
never makes sense it's it doesn't
operate at a profit at all they don't
even recoup their losses in the
slightest so i'm going to read frida's
comments a second but you guys may not
know this
the british empire in india operated at
a profit
they insisted that the people of india
pay enough taxes
to finance
their own conquest and occupation
how perverse is that so people of india
had to pay taxes
to pay the british army
to conquer and occupy them now that's
colonialism right now there's another
sense in which you can have colonialism
i'm going to read the thing from freda
where like the
one country conquers another and then
just takes all the diamonds takes all
the gold you know it's it's extractive
colonialism where it's operating at a
profit that way but nothing like that
happens in the current epoch of american
imperialism it's it's all it's all done
on this charitable basis it's money
losing to an unbelievable set and frida
said quote uh and i don't think the u.s
has really exploited afghan resources
have they
opium uh afghanistan's most valuable
export is opium uh continuing quote
colonialism in latin america also
included education and religious
indoctrination aside from the
exploitation of minds yeah that's great
so yeah i mean you know i'm i'm making
exactly that that kind of contrast um
that you know i'm willing to say
colonialism was bad but actually what
we've done in afghanistan the last 20
years is worse
and you can take a look back at the
videos i made about china and xinjiang
and where i'm able to say very
comfortable in those videos well if you
think what china is doing in xinjiang is
bad what america has been doing in
afghanistan is much worse it really is
and worse in principle worse in practice
and worse than its outcomes because
guess what what china did in xinjiang
actually works
and that's because the chinese are
willing to admit to themselves what it
is they're trying to accomplish they're
trying to create a secular future for
senja not
not what the americans created in the
government of hamad karzai and so on
yeah
well so so brett anderson says this is
i'm again i'm saying this
i'm trying to get you to sympathize with
all sides of this equation brad anderson
says quote
i'll pronounce your name probably brett
anderson says quote i always saw this as
colonialism so many white folks always
seem to see themselves as the good guys
when they go on to other countries with
guns it's weird we shoot you because we
want you to be free close quote
okay brett
but what about when white people go to
other countries and learn the language
and get married
and raise kids
and work on a farm
and with time produce a new hybrid
culture
right that's the contrast with
colonialism
right is where you actually you actually
have a meaningful engagement the
americans in this whole thing they just
behaved like mercenaries they were all
there temporarily it was temporary for
20 years
and again um even even we don't
the extent to which sanskrit was taught
in universities in england the extent of
which england became a place where
people learned the languages of india so
that they could go and rule india's and
it wasn't for charitable reasons people
studied sanskrit and arabic and other
other
indian and middle eastern languages
precisely because they wanted to get a
job in the colonial administration
um but you know
uh
colonialism may be bad
but what we have been doing is worse
and it is definitely worse in its
outcomes now i just want to say very
briefly because you said white folks
not just white people
engage
in colonialism you know there is a
parallel history that's easy to imagine
that the united states of america could
have conquered afghanistan as they did
and set up 550 army bases as they did
and they could have invited in hundreds
of thousands of people from northern
india
to colonize afghanistan they said okay
we're going to protect you and people
from india could come and intermarry
with and live permanently with and
participate in gradually transforming
the culture of afghanistan and
integrating it into the modern world and
integrating it into a more cosmopolitan
world you know
the united states could have involved
many other countries and nationalities
in terms of colonialism in the
old-fashioned sense of it sure there's
no reason to presume it would be white
people and in the history of the world
generally all kinds of non-white people
also conquer and colonize other people
so there isn't there isn't a single
dimension in that equation
and someone else got the hummus
reference so there you go
ah provocative quote from nacho nacho
says quote do we go to the left where
there's nothing right or go to the right
where there's nothing left
i have never heard that before yeah for
all i know that's on a hallmark card i
if that's a political slogan that is one
i've never heard before henry gann says
um you could do a 24-hour stream and
still not cover all the mistakes made in
this war laughing at the stupidity
crying at the tragedy
yeah okay guys i'm happy to i'm happy to
wrap it up there
um
i'm gonna return to my original question
what if this was
the single most important political
event of your lifetime
you know
looking back now
what difference could you have made
what difference
should you have made i think all of us
feel
that the tragedy of our own
ignorance our own indifference towards
this
our own relative detachment from these
political events
as they unfolded happen precisely
because of our own certainty
that our involvement our even just our
knowledge our lobbying could never make
any difference
now
you know
i'm willing to imagine
in a science fiction universe
you could have a society with too much
democracy
you know i can imagine that
there is nothing
like that on this earth today
i i cannot think of any society
that exists in the 21st century where
you can say there is too much
democracy babe could you grab me
xenophon it's at the right hand side of
the
right-hand shelf thanks babe you know i
just want to say you know okay
ancient athens was not paradise
insert a whole bunch of cynical comments
about you know slavery in athens blah
blah blah you know
the level of democracy
within the military
in this period of ancient greece the
role of elections
the role of the lower ranks being able
to question the higher ranks because
they elected them because they vote for
them they follow their orders
but they also vote for them the role of
democracy
within an army and in this case it's an
army in a foreign war it's an army
overseas so to speak it's an army far
off
in persia the level
of democracy
that was taken for granted
in a hierarchical military unit
where if you misbehaved
you could be whipped
you could be beaten with rods
you could be killed ultimately like if
you if you did something bad if you fell
asleep
when you were on
watch duty or something you could be
beaten you could be with you you could
be outright killed
by your commander but you elected him
you elected the person in charge of your
battalion of your
unit
you know
um
in this war
everything worth knowing
was secret
you know
and the greater tragedy is
even if you could have known more
because probably all of us feel we could
have oh i could have done more research
i could have done more reading you know
that if you had known more
you couldn't have done more
and it's not just a lack of democracy
in the united states of america you know
i'm sorry again it's 20 years ago it's
so easy to forget
what about extraordinary rendition
what about torture what about the rules
of engagement what about shooting
innocent civilians and children there
were all these things that meant so much
to me they meant a lot to me 2001 2002
2003 like right at the beginning of the
conflict i cared passionately what about
the ethical questions about the use of
drones and drone strikes what about the
ethical questions about the use of
depleted uranium bullets and depleted
uranium armor
is there a million really serious
ethical questions but sure i mean one of
the simplest torture interrogation what
about the ecological questions what
about even strategic questions that none
of us were a part of you know i remember
at one point
this is part of why barack obama's
military budget was was so great barack
obama was using a type of missile i'm
not going to quote the brand name
because i might get it wrong but i
remember reading this detailed article
he was using a type of medium-range
missile
and depending on the conditions of it
being fired it could cost 1 million
dollars per launch
so the most expensive way to launch it
was from a submarine
but they very frequently did launch them
from submarines i could get into the
details why it was like if you launched
it from land it was only half a million
dollars if you launched it from a
submarine it was a million dollars but
this is like the per missile price but
the attitude of barack obama
and everyone today is quoting this
number 2 500 americans died 2 500
americans died
well you had leaders who didn't know war
and didn't care about war guys like
barack obama guys like george w bush you
had guys who didn't know islam and
didn't care about cultural change didn't
care about really having a plan for the
next 100 years how are you going to
change the fate of central asia forever
how are you going to change the fate of
the world forever by saying this is
democracy this is islamic fascism you
have to make a choice now who's with me
let's fight for it because you're going
to spend a trillion dollars either way
so you're going to waste a trillion
dollars you're going to spend a trillion
dollars and make a permanent difference
on planet earth forever but you get a
guy like barack obama whose whole
mentality was to have as few people
as possible on the ground as few boots
on the ground as possible as few
american lives lost and then willing to
spend one million dollars on a single
missile strike you know this extensive
use you know he massively expanded the
role of of drone strikes and everything
else and you know
you know what that makes you
it makes you a coward
and even if you win those battles
if you win them with anonymous faceless
drone strikes and missiles that drop out
of the sky you know what you lose
you lose the respect of the people
you know it's goddamn hard to win the
respect of people and you got to learn
their language you got to live with them
you got to eat their food
and you got to marry their daughters and
you have to send your women to get
married to their sons conceptually in
america that's somehow harder somehow
like white man foreign woman is easier
to deal with than white woman
marrying an afghan man and you've got to
commit all the way
not to supporting
a homophobic
muslim fundamentalist government that's
five percent more democratic than the
taliban you have to commit to saying oh
no no
you're going to have gay rights here
whether you like it or not
and and you get to say as barack obama
would be easier for barack obama to say
than for a idiot like george w bush you
get to stand there and say hey guess
what
10 of you were gay
whether you know it or not whether you
admit it or not well i know i know there
were no gay rights protests in
afghanistan there weren't any in 2001
there weren't any in 2005 there weren't
any in 2010
i know there aren't going to be gay
rights protests you aren't going to rise
up and demand gay rights but i know
there are 10 percent of you who will
benefit from this and i am going to
fight for your rights even if you won't
and i'm going to present you with the
future of afghanistan where gay people
get to openly be gay and they can even
watch i don't know a soap opera about
gay people on tv or something or this
level of modern liberal cultural you
know uh
assumptions you know where you you
really represent that and really pursue
that and then you back that up with
boots on the ground
you know
um
imagine if anyone
back in 2001 let's say december of 2001.
if someone had sat there and said
look
with 20 years
and 1 trillion dollars
how much do you think we can accomplish
for the future of afghanistan how much
do you think we can accomplish for the
future of central asia
how much do you think we can accomplish
for the future of atheism for the future
of secularism changing the muslim world
forever taking what was the most extreme
islamic dictatorship in the world what
was more extreme than saudi arabia right
of course more extreme than egypt or
other examples
and turning that around so that it
becomes an outpost for democracy and and
atheism and open homosexuality and
feminism and women's equality in
education you know um
[Music]
so on and so forth you know
you know
george w bush's
failure ultimately was a failure of
vision
you know
and
it's too late
i'm so sick of hearing this phrase
learning the lessons of history learning
the lessons of the vietnam wars all
right okay guys so now it's
2021 right it's too late right it's too
late for us to make that difference it's
it's too late for us to have that vision
for the last 20 years but it's not too
late for us to have that vision for the
next 20 years it's not too late for us
to start thinking seriously about the
next century
now i try not to quote my own book too
much i'm writing a book and it's not
finished
but you know there's very various parts
of the book that are really passionate
and hopeful
in contrast to some of the incredibly
bleak and hopeless material
about american politics you know
one of the things i say at one point in
the book i just
say to the reader directly
you know
um
look at china now
and think about how different it is from
china 100 years ago
we can be that different again
in the next 100 years
we can change our own society we can
change our own culture we can change our
own politics we can make much more
progress
in the next hundred years
than the communist dictatorship of china
made in the last hundred years and i
know i'm all alone on this guys i know
that nobody else sees it that way
the furthest left-wing person
is profoundly conservative compared to
me because when they look at american
culture they think nothing can change
the most left-wing person in france
lives with this same kind of
hopelessness and the same kind of
resignationism because they think
nothing can change
now you know when you look at
afghanistan and again 20 years ago
nobody looked at it and said
how much how much change is possible
with one trillion dollars in 20 years
oh a lot of changes possible a
tremendous profound fundamental cultural
social political change as possible that
would have made the world a better place
and one of the reasons why we didn't
accomplish that was that that was not
even what george w bush was trying to
accomplish that wasn't what barack obama
was trying to accomplish you know there
was something better possible and you
know we we bungled it and you and i and
everyone in this audience we all have
blood on our hands all of us are
responsible there there was no
amendment to the constitution about
torture it never happened
oh we cared so much about it
2001 2005 and then we just forgot there
was no amendment to the constitution
about extraordinary rendition there was
there were all these profound
fundamental
moral problems none of which resulted in
new legislation we didn't change we
didn't adapt we didn't learn the lessons
of history as it was happening and we
haven't learned lessons of history you
know now that it's over
you know i want to make a different
point about afghanistan
when you look at where afghanistan is
today
and where when you look at where we are
now
i want to say to you that we can make
even more progress than that in the next
hundred years
in the next hundred years ahead
we can be more different
from the people we are now
then we are different
from afghanistan
all right the darkness of the dark ages
can finally come to an end
in paris and london and new york we can
have a future that is really genuinely
secular that is really authentically
atheist that is really profoundly
directly democratic
we can have all those things
but it's going to start
with admitting to ourselves
that we ain't got it
that we want wanted
and that we'll have to make terrible
sacrifices
to make any change at all
[Music]